Speaking of Bev Sheffield, I gained a good deal of
respect for that man. And I respected him very much
as a professional. He was in every sense a
professional. He was also a person who did
something that I wish a lot of parks or recreation
directors would do. And I should not say parks,
because William Osborne was head of parks.
division in the Public Works Department. They
have maintained a log to the very best of the
ability of the department of every person who ever
used City of Austin Park and Recreation
facilities. This was an amazing thing. There were
a couple of influences in this. One was those
neighborhood pools. He kept a roster of the
youngsters and the families they came from at all
these neighborhood pools. Because the pools
would be open from about 6 or 6.30 in the morning.
They would shut down at 10 or 10.30, reopen at 2.30
or something like that in the afternoon, and be
open until sunset. Of course, the middle day thing
was for cleaning and normal maintenance. But it
was also a way to be sure that the pools didn't just
become a lounging place. The mornings were
particularly filled with swimming classes and
various sorts of things. But Bev used that as one
group. Secondly, the people who reserved tables
in the municipal parks, he kept a permanent
register of everybody who requested, made a
reservation of a picnic table or a camping spot,
that is a day camp spot, in any city park. He did the
same thing for all of the people who used the
municipal golf courses. He maintained that.
Every tee-off time, he knew when every person had
gone through. He did the same thing for the tennis
centers. He kept a log of all of these people, and he
made it a point. And of course, at Zilker Park, if
there were activities there, whoever the prime
movers were of those activities, Bev Sheffield
could call on these people who were active park
users
on any issue that might threaten the sanctity or
the utility, the protection of a park or a
recreation program. And I had occasion one time to
be in his offices down along the river when there
was some issue being proposed before the city
council by some group. And I don't remember what
the issue was, but I remember Bev talking to his
secretary and saying,
let's start a chain telephone call because the
city council on whatever it was, Thursday morning
or Tuesday morning, will have this issue up. I know
that these people will be interested. At that city
council meeting, which was in the old, then the
city council chamber, which maybe could seat 100
people, he had over 200 people at the door. And this
was on less than a 24-hour notice.
Lots of pressure. Lots of pressure, but pressure
that wasn't misapplied. It wasn't abused. And Bev
always knew exactly whether to use it or not use it.
And we were able, in the planning effort, to
benefit from some of that. The contrary was the...
Public Works Department had some rather narrow,
in my judgment, narrow interpretations of what
the thoroughfare system plan, major streets plan
should be. And they were very skittish about
issues where proposals might require widening of
right of way or something of this sort. They would
prefer, for example, to build four-lane
thoroughfares with 36-foot of roadway.
Maybe 40 if they felt very generous. This is a
trademark of Austin, the narrow streets. That's
largely the Public Works Department influence.
Everybody that visits Austin remarks about this.
Part of that was almost a A social philosophy, we
don't want people to move too quickly. The
thoroughfare was seen as a route of convenience,
not a route of necessity. And therefore, that was a
route to be preferred by people moving around the
town, not to travel long distances, but just
simply a route of travel, a route of convenience.
probably has done more through the years to limit
what happened. Hal had to work within the
framework of getting, well, between two
boundaries. One was getting across the concepts
of the thoroughfare plan, major streets plan. The
other was getting across or having to deal with
public works people who, because they were
engineering and the electrical engineer was the
head of city government, were very, very strong in
their role and could almost effectively cancel
out any planning effort that could be done. So I
think in the years subsequently,
some of that control in public works, while it has
diminished some, I don't see it really as having
given way that much.
Gus Lavander, good sweep, was then head of Public
Works Department. Reuben Roundtree, that's
R-O-U-N-T-R-E-A.
Lavander's L-E-V-A-N-D-E-R. Like lavender, but
you reverse the A and the E.
Gus was very pro-planning, but Reuben Roundtree
was very concerned about not infringing on
neighboring property. So if it came down to a
question of widening right-of-way or having a
narrower roadway, he would opt for the narrower
roadway in preference to taking a row of houses or
business furniture. Hellwise, in later years
when we were in Tulsa, I was confronted with the
same problem with the director of public works in
downtown Tulsa. And he found out, apparently,
because of previous experience in dealing with
these folks, how to get around them. And the city
traffic engineer in Tulsa was due to retire in two
years. But in the meantime, he was blocking every
proposal for a continuous, comprehensive,
one-way street pattern throughout the center of
downtown Tulsa, which was absolutely essential
for getting it to work properly. So Harold just
simply hired Alan Voorhees to come in, and just
simply by dint of professional overkill was able
to convince the decision makers that that was the
way to do it. I think, by response, I think that
where that can work in a city like Tulsa, could work
in Dallas, could work in Fort Worth, I have to
admit, as much as I love the town, Austin is very,
very, very provincial. And the provincialism is
one of the things that adds to its appeal and its
attraction. It's the thing that gets in its way a
lot of times. I don't know that even Alan Voorhees'
organization could have overpowered that
situation. I really don't know that they could
have because The underlying philosophy was we
don't want people to move quickly. We want them to
mosey along and enjoy the scenery. So you don't
need wide streets. The same philosophy happens in
Berkeley. Oh, is that right? Yeah. And there have
been more than one comparisons drawn between
Berkeley and Austin. And the philosophy in
Berkeley is that it's a city of neighborhoods, and
that people who are driving in Berkeley in
Berkeley because they want to be there. They don't
go through Berkeley to get somewhere else. Yeah,
I've heard that.
Looking at it a little further, looking at the
consequences of the plan that Hal developed, I
would also say that the conditions in Austin have
also changed, as they have everywhere, but
perhaps because Austin is now deciding it should
be reaching out to the outside world, that the
Balcones Research Lab operations, the whole
concept of the
computer technology and all of the offerings
there, that seems to be influencing Austin, even
to the extent that we will see in the Times Herald in
Dallas. In the want ads, City of Austin, that's all
it will say, City of Austin under a heading, won't
even advertise for a specific job, but they will
have periodically these one-liners in the
classifieds, obviously trying to keep people in
the Dallas area interested in what's going on in
city government in Austin. Nobody else is putting
those ads in except the city. People in College
Station don't read the Dallas Times-Herald. Oh,
they don't? That's interesting. They do good to
read. Because of the comments of your sports
editors about our recruiting methods. That
needn't be on the page.
Beyond the plan for the city, the long-term plan
that Hal Wise and his associates developed, and
while I say developed, it was really in concert
with input from the staff, which were essentially
concerned with the day-to-day planning
activities, and input from department heads. I
think there are a couple of things that should be
noted. Were there staff planners that should be
mentioned? Yeah. OK. Let me just mention that. One
of the people that was a very strong personality in
all of this on the day-to-day operations was Wayne
Golden. Wayne was in a rather lesser level
position when I went there as planning director.
By the time I left, he was heading up the current
planning activities. Then by the time the major
effort of Hal Wise was completed, Evelyn Slatum
Butler was ready to, she was moving into a number
two position under Hoyle Osborne, who was then
responsible for advanced planning. in between
Jerry Finley who came down from the state of
Washington and no
I take that back he was from Oregon and he was
essentially our staff research person Ruben
Vallejo who has since been with HUD over the years,
based in Fort Worth, and was, in fact, planner on
the staff in Fort Worth when I went there later,
many years later, and then left and went with HUD.
These were some of the key people in the staff.
There were some others in various roles, but I'd
like to point out a couple of things. One is,
because of Wayne Golden's efforts. And this was
the frontline soldier kind of effort that had to be
dealt with, had to be worked at all the time. Wayne,
through the supportive provision in the Austin
City Charter and the supporting provisions in
state law providing for extraterritorial
jurisdiction, Wayne was able to convince the
county commissioners that we should not be giving
final clearance to subdivision plants outside
the city limits within our extraterritorial
jurisdiction unless the county commissioners
were also willing to impose certain standards in
the nature of public improvements on streets and
and other public facilities. The city of Austin
had leverage in this because there were, I believe
at the time in existence then, seven water control
improvement districts that extended outside the
city limits. In fact, went all the way to the county
line. And in some cases, north and south went
beyond the county line. So that in one area of the
north, for instance, one of those water control
improvement districts, as I recall, was into
Williamson County. That meant, because the city
of Austin was the supplier of the water, of the
treated water, to the water control improvement
district, the city of Austin could impose certain
restrictions or improvement requirements on any
subdivision in this extraterritorial
jurisdiction, even if it were 10, 15 miles outside
the city limits. But that would be fine with
respect to utilities. But what we did not have
adequate support on was the boundary streets. Nor
did we really have a level of authority within the
subdivisions as to street improvements. And in
that regard, Wayne Golden made it a point to
convince the county commissioners, and he
deserves full credit for it, that they should
adopt some standards for street construction in
unincorporated areas. Now, the standards were
not that great. As one would look back on it today,
one would probably say, hey, why didn't he do
something more than that? The truth of the matter
was, up until that point, we had no standards. And
it was a matter of getting something on the books
where there would be a good, reasonably durable,
20-year life hard top road. And Wayne was the
person who really managed to put that together,
that idea. And the county commissioners backed
it, and they would not approve the subdivision
outside the city limits, nor the providing of any
county services to that subdivision until the
developer put those streets in. Now, we didn't
have the lever to get them to maintain the streets.
But the county then, once the street would be
dedicated, then had to pick up the maintenance
responsibility. County commissioners were
beginning to see the consequence of poor streets.
So Wayne really deserves credit for that. The
other thing that we were able to accomplish was a
base mapping program, which for the most part was
my brainchild. And we were able to get through tax
maps and other maps from public works departments
We were able to get the material using US
Geological Survey photos as the controls and maps
that USGS made for us, base maps with the
appropriate property identification for a very,
very large area in Austin and Travis County. I
don't know whether those maps are still being
used. I suspect not. Certainly today there are
more adequate methods of putting things
together. But we had one whole wall that was 8 feet
high and 12 feet long where the maps were literally
fitted together like pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.
And then from that shot down so that we could get
base maps. a tremendous undertaking, but it did
turn out to be, I think, a very worthwhile
endeavor.
Now, Austin has always had a particularly good
reputation in terms of subdivision review
procedures within the planning department.
Would you like to go into that? That procedure,
basically, After I arrived in Austin in 53, we
built on the procedure, expanded on it from what
had been used up until that point, and Wayne Golden
was the man responsible for maintaining that
procedure. He and a man by the name of Foxworth were
both involved in this to some extent.
The thing that happened with the establishment of
the Planning Commission under the new city
charter was to make clear the responsibility of
the Planning Commission to exercise per state
law, but in behalf of all city departments, the
review and approval of subdivision plans, both
the preliminary plans and the final plans for
record. The commission, set up a schedule. And
this was perhaps somewhat unique, especially at
that time it was unique. And that was that the
commission set its regular meetings every third
week.
Those were, it did not matter what the month was. We
started in the first week of the year, and every
third week thereafter, there was a Planning
Commission meeting. The Board of Adjustment, met
also on a three-week schedule in between those.
But the commission's two, or I should, well, three
committees, a master plan committee, a
subdivision committee, and a zoning committee
met on three-week schedules also. The zoning
committee meeting two weeks, as I recall, two
weeks before the commission meeting.
subdivision review committee or plaque
committee meeting one week before the commission
meeting. One of the things that was accomplished
there, and I think it is really a credit to the whole
Austin staff, was a desire to see an improved
quality of subdivisions. And subdivision
control was viewed as being rather critical.
Zoning was, I hate to say it, but seemed to be
flaunted some, and I guess to some extent that
accusation might still be made in lots of cities,
in that it was a political trade-off or something
or other. Not a payoff, but a trade-off. If you
allow this, then what happens here on this other
property? But with subdivision control, there
was an earnest desire to improve the the
conveyance of property to be sure that the
necessary provisions be made for public
utilities and private utilities and for
protection of drainage ways. There was a concern
within the planning department about adequacy
and right of way for especially the major streets.
But the whole process went very, very smoothly.
And I think even people with whom I had dealings,
sometimes at moments of some heightened
difference of opinion, had to say that they felt
they were basically and overall treated fairly,
even though they might not like the decision that
came out of a subdivision committee meeting or out
of the commission meeting on a proposed plan. For
the most part, I think they had to say the process
worked well and nobody was handicapped. Nobody
was hindered unnecessarily in accomplishing
what they wanted to do. One of those is a builder, a
developer, that is still building right here in
the Dallas area, and that's Nash Phillips Copas.
Nash Phillips was always the arbitrator in the
organization. Clyde Copas was sort of like the
baddie rooster, always wanting to get on with
something and not pay too much attention or
wanting to be bothered too much by rules and
regulations. But that's when Clyde was younger.
And I think he's changed his line some since over
the years. But you mentioned Evelyn. Yes. What was
her role? Evelyn had the review in the case of
subdivisions and of zoning. She had the review
from the standpoint of, The plan, the long-range
plan, what were the implications for the
long-range plan? And where Wayne was really the
administrator for subdivisions, Evelyn was the
reviewer, not on the internals of the
subdivision, but rather on the impact issue. What
externally could impact on the subdivision, and
how would the subdivision itself impact on the
community? So hers was really one of looking at the
long range consequences more than the short
range. Wade's was the job of getting this thing
through the process and through the pipeline.
Hoyle, Osborne, had responsibility in examining
subdivisions to the extent, as I recall, to the
extent that he would try to make some judgments on
either the social or the economic consequences of
a particular subdivision on a total area related
to things that Evelyn was looking at. But she was
normally looking at the physical design
implications. He was looking more at the social
and economic implications. And team-wise, it was
a pretty darn good team, frankly. I always felt
very good about that situation.
Then you left to go to... Yeah, when I left Austin, I
went to Yuma, Arizona. What year was that? That was
1958. I was in Austin from 53 to 58. And Hoyle
Osborne took over. And Hoyle then took over
immediately. I left the operation in his good
hands. And I might add, there was one other person
there that was not a planner, but had been in the
operation before that, And that was Jewel Osburn.
She's since retired from the city. And she was...
Any relation? No, no relation, and the spelling is
different. Hers
without an E on the end of it. O-S-B-O-R-N and his
O-S-B-O-R-N-E. And then there was a William
Osburn in public works who was O-S-B-U-R-N.
But Jewel Osburn was... secretary under Bill
Parker, William O. Parker, when Bill was, and he
was really my predecessor, but he had been in the
job on
somewhat of a staff support role under Public
Works before the charter revisions. He was in part
of that time, during part of those several years
before, he was finishing up his degree in
architecture. at UT Austin. And he had also done,
in fact, he was the designer. This is somewhat
interesting because the city of Austin and Walter
Seaholm, the city manager, really wouldn't give
Bill Parker the freedom to move like a planning
operation should have. But Bill was the designer
for Mo Ranch, which is the Presbyterian facility
that down in Kerrville area that is even to this day
very popular amongst people in the Presbyterian
Church that go down there for retreats and so on.
And he was really the planner for that facility,
and it's been built largely according to the
design concepts that Bill Parker laid out. But
Bill would have been great there if he'd had the
kind of freedom I had, but he just didn't have it. He
was the first planning director. He was called
City Planner. That was his official title. And
never recognized in the status of a department
head. I was the first one going in with recognition
as a department head.
When I left Austin in 1958, I went to Yuma to head the
city county planning department. And in that
particular instance, they had a plan done by
Stanford Research Institute,
which was questionable in a lot of areas. I had to
live with the thing. I didn't know that they did
plan. I think it was one of the few ventures. And the
person who had preceded me who was there before SRI
came in was an
electro-hydraulics engineer who somehow or
other had happened in the Yuma because of being
associated with dams and hydro-generating
facilities. in the Northwest and the Colorado
River and so on. He wound up there. My principal
activities in Yuma were one, to bridge conflicts
between city and county government. Second, it
was obviously not possible to do much since the
community was on the plan, since the community was
very proud of having that plan in their hands.
Although there was a lot of negative feeling
toward my predecessor. I had pretty good support
from both city and county government. In fact, I
would say overall very good support from the
county supervisors. The city government, which
was under a mayor council operational form, was
not
too well oriented to planning because All of their
decisions were very much short range this year or
next year at the most. And many of the things that
really needed to be addressed were the long range
issues. However, a couple of things were
accomplished in very specific terms. One was
getting some coordination with the State Highway
Department on the location of the Interstate
Highway coming out of Tucson and Phoenix.